<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
			<p>“Gabriel,” he said to me one morning, “dost thou not feel like smashing something?”</p>
			<p>“Augustine, dost thou not feel like smashing something?” I responded. It will be seen that we were “thee-ing” and “thou-ing” each other after three days’ acquaintance.</p>
			<p>“Not very much,” he said, “suppose the first ball strikes us dead!”</p>
			<p>“We shall die for our country, for Saragossa; and although posterity will not remember us, it is always an honor to fall on the field of battle for a cause like this.”</p>
			<p>“You are right,” he answered sadly; “but it is a pity to die. We are young. Who knows for what we are destined in life?”</p>
			<p>“Life is a trifle, and its importance is not worth thinking of.”</p>
			<p>“That is for the aged to say, but not us who are just beginning to live. Frankly, I do not wish to die in this terrible circle which the French have drawn about us. In the other siege, however, all the students of the Seminary took arms, and I confess that I was more valiant then than now. A peculiar zeal filled my blood, and I threw myself into places of greatest danger without fear of death. Today does not find me the same. I am timid and afraid, and when a gun goes off, it makes me tremble.”</p>
			<p>“That is natural. Fear does not exist when one does not realize the danger. As far as that is concerned, they say the most valiant soldiers are the raw recruits.”</p>
			<p>“There is nothing in that. Indeed, Gabriel, I confess that the mere question of dying does not strike me as the greatest evil. But if I die, I am going to entrust you with a commission which I hope you will fulfil carefully like a good friend. Listen well to what I tell you. You see that tower that leans this way, as if to see what is passing here, or hear what we are saying?”</p>
			<p>“The Torre Nueva? I see it. What charge are you going to give me for that lady?”</p>
			<p>Day was breaking, and between the irregular-tiled roofs of the city, between the spires and minarets, the balconies and the cupolas of the churches, the Torre Nueva, old and unfinished, stood out distinctly.</p>
			<p>“Listen well!” said Augustine. “If I am killed with the first shot on this day which is now dawning, when the battle is ended, and they break ranks, you must go there.”</p>
			<p>“To the Torre Nueva? Behold me! I arrive. I enter!”</p>
			<p>“No, man, not enter. Listen, I will tell you. You arrive at the Plaza de San Felipe where the tower is. Look yonder! Do you see there near the great pile there is another tower, a little belfry? It seems like an acolyte before his lord the canon, which is the great tower.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, now I see the altar-boy. And if I am not mistaken, it is the belfry of San Felipe. And the damned thing is ringing this minute!”</p>
			<p>“For mass, it is ringing for mass,” said Augustine, with great emotion. “Do you not hear the cracked bell?”</p>
			<p>“Very plainly. Let us know what I have to say to this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Altar-boy who is ringing the cracked bell.”</p>
			<p>“No, no, it is nothing about him. You arrive at the Plaza of San Felipe. If you look at the belfry, you will see it is on a corner, and from this corner runs a narrow street. You enter there, and at the left you will find at a little distance another street, narrow and retired, called Anton Trillo. You follow this until you reach the back of the church. There you will see a house. You stop there⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And then I come back again?”</p>
			<p>“No; close to the house there is a garden, with a little gateway painted the color of chocolate. You stop there.”</p>
			<p>“There I stop, and there I am!”</p>
			<p>“No, old man. You will see⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You’re whiter than your shirt, my Augustine. What do all these towers and stoppages signify?”</p>
			<p>“They mean,” continued my friend, with increasing embarrassment, “that in a little while you will be there. I desire you to go by night. All right, you arrive there. You stop. You wait a little, then you pass to the opposite sidewalk. You stretch your neck, and you will see a window over the wall of a garden. You pick up a pebble and throw it against the panes of glass lightly, to do little damage.”</p>
			<p>“And in a second she will come!”</p>
			<p>“No; have patience. How do you know whether she will come or not come?”</p>
			<p>“Well, let us suppose that she comes.”</p>
			<p>“Before I tell you another thing, you must understand that it is there the goodman Candiola lives. Do you know who Candiola is? Well, he is a citizen of Saragossa, a man who, as they say, has in his house a cellar full of money. He is avaricious and a usurer, and when he lends he guts his customers. He knows more about debtors, laws, and foreclosures than the whole court and council of Castile. Whoever goes to law with him is lost.”</p>
			<p>“From all this, the house with a gate painted chocolate color should be a magnificent palace.”</p>
			<p>“Nothing of the sort. You will see a wretched-looking house that seems about to fall down. I tell you that that goodman Candiola is a miser. He does not waste a real that he can help. And if you should see him about here you would give him alms. I will tell you another thing; he is never seen in Saragossa, and they call him goodman Candiola in mockery and contempt. His name is Don Jeronimo de Candiola; he is a native of Mallorca, if I am not mistaken.”</p>
			<p>“And this Candiola has a daughter?”</p>
			<p>“Wait, man, how impatient you are! How do you know whether or not he has a daughter?” he answered, hiding his agitation by these evasions. “Well, as I was just going to tell you, Candiola is detested in the city for his great avarice and wicked heart. Many poor men has he put in prison after ruining them. Worse still, during the other siege he did not give a farthing for the war, nor take up arms, nor receive the wounded into his house, nor could they wring a peseta from him; and, as he said one day it was all one to him whether he gave to John or to Peter, he was on the point of being arrested.”</p>
			<p>“Well, he is a pretty piece, this man of the house of the garden of the chocolate-colored gate! And what if when the pebble strikes the window, goodman Candiola comes out with a cudgel and gives me a good beating for flirting with his daughter?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be an idiot! Hush! You must know that as soon as it gets dark, Candiola shuts himself in an underground room, and there he stays counting his money until after midnight. Bah! He is well occupied now. The neighbors say they hear a muffled sound as if bags of coins were being tumbled out.”</p>
			<p>“Very well. I arrive there. I throw the stone. She comes, and I tell her⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You tell her that I am dead. No, don’t be cruel; give her this amulet. No, tell her⁠—no, it will be better to tell her nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Then I will give her the amulet?”</p>
			<p>“By no means. Do not take the amulet to her.”</p>
			<p>“Now, now I understand. As soon as she comes I am to say good night and march myself away singing, ‘The Virgin del Pilar says⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p>“No, it is enough that she learns of my death. You must do as I tell you.”</p>
			<p>“But if you don’t tell me anything.”</p>
			<p>“How hasty you are! Wait. Perhaps they’ll not kill me today.”</p>
			<p>“True. And what a bother about nothing!”</p>
			<p>“There is one thing which I have left out, Gabriel, and I shall tell it to you frankly. I have had many, very many great desires to confide to you this secret which weighs upon my breast. To whom could I tell it but to you, my friend? If I did not tell you, my heart would break like a pomegranate. I have been greatly afraid of telling it at night in my dreams. Because of this fear I cannot sleep. If my father, my mother, my brother, suspected it, they would kill me.”</p>
			<p>“And the fathers at the Seminary?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t name the fathers. You shall see. I will tell you what has befallen me. Do you know Father Rincon? Well, Father Rincon loves me very much, and every evening he used to make me come out for a walk by the river or towards Torrero or the Juslibol road. We would talk of theology and literature. Rincon is so enthusiastic about the great poet Horace that he used to say, ‘It is a pity that that man wasn’t a Christian so that he could be canonized.’ He always carries with him a little Elzevir, which he loves more than the apple of his eye. When we were tired walking, he would sit down and read, and between the two of us we would make whatever comments occurred to us. Well, now I will tell you that Father Rincon was a kinsman of Doña Maria Rincon, the deceased wife of Candiola, who has a little property in the Monzalbarba road, with a wretched little country house, more like a hut than a house, but embowered in leafy trees, and with delightful views of the Ebro. One afternoon, after we had been reading the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="la">Quis multa gracilis te puer in rosa</i>, my teacher desired to visit his relative. We went there; we entered the garden, and Candiola was not there; but his daughter came to meet us, and Rincon said to her, ‘Mariquilla, get some peaches for this young man, and get me a glass of you know what.’ ”</p>
			<p>“And is Mariquilla nice?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t ask that. What if she is nice? You shall see. Father Rincon stroked his beard, and turning towards me said, ‘Augustine, confess that in your lifetime you have never seen a more perfect face than this one. Look at those eyes of fire, that angel’s mouth, and that bit of heaven for a brow.’ I was trembling, and Mariquilla laughed, her face all rosy red. Then Rincon continued, saying, ‘To you, who are a future father of the church, an example, a young pattern, without other passion than that for books, this divinity may show herself. Jove! admire here the admirable work of the Supreme Creator. Observe the expression of that face, the sweetness of those glances, the grace of that smile, the freshness, the delicacy of that complexion, the fineness of that skin, and confess that if heaven is beautiful, flowers, mountains, light, all the creations of God are nothing beside woman, the most perfect and finished work of the immortal hand.’ Thus spoke my teacher, and I, mute and astonished, did not cease to contemplate that master work which was certainly better than the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Aeneid</i>. I cannot tell you what I felt. Imagine the Ebro, that great river, which descends from its springs to give itself to the sea, all at once changing its channel and trying to run upward, returning to the Asturias. The same thing took place in my spirit. I myself was astonished that all my ideas had been changed from their wonted course and turned backward, cutting I know not what new channels. I assure you I was astonished, and I am yet. Looking at her without satisfying the longing of my soul or of my eyes, I said to myself, ‘I love her in a wonderful way! How is it that until now I have never fallen in love?’ I had never seen Mariquilla until that moment.”</p>
			<p>“And the peaches?”</p>
			<p>“Mariquilla was as much disturbed before me as I before her. Father Rincon went to talk with the gardener about the encroachments that the French had made upon the property (that was soon after the first of September, a month after the raising of the first siege), and Mariquilla and I remained alone. Alone! My first impulse was to cut and run; and she, as she has told me, also felt the same. Neither she nor I ran. We stayed there. All at once I felt an extraordinary movement of my intellect. Breaking the silence, I began to talk with her. We talked about all sorts of indifferent things at first, but to me came thoughts beyond my usual understanding, surpassing the ordinary, and all, all, all, I uttered. Mariquilla answered me little, but her eyes were only more eloquent than when I was talking to her. At last Father Rincon called, and we marched away. I took leave of her, and in a low voice said that we would soon meet again. We returned to Saragossa. Yes, the street, the trees, the Ebro, the cupola of the Pilar, the belfries of Saragossa, the passersby, the houses, the walls of the garden, the pavements, the sound of the wind, the dogs of the street, all seemed different to me, all, heaven and earth had been changed. My good teacher began to read again in Horace, and I said that Horace wasn’t worth anything. He wished me to dine with him, and threatened me with the loss of his friendship. I praised Virgil with enthusiasm, and repeated the celebrated lines⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
				<p>
					<span>Est mollis flamma medullas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>interea et tacitum vivit sub pectore vulnus.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“This was about the first of September,” said I, “and since then?”</p>
			<p>“From that day a new life began for me. It commenced with a burning disquiet that robbed me of sleep, making distasteful to me all that was not Mariquilla. My own father’s house was hateful to me; and wandering about the environs of Saragossa without any companion, I sought peace for my spirit in solitude. I hated the college, all books and theology, and when October came, and they wished me to bind myself to live shut up in the holy house, I feigned illness in order to remain in my own. Thanks to the war that has made us all soldiers, I have been able to live free, to go at all hours, day and night, and see and talk with her frequently. I go to her house, make the signal agreed upon; she descends, opens her grated window; we talk long hours. People pass by, but I am muffled in my cloak even up to the eyes. With this and the darkness of night, no one recognizes me. As far as that is concerned, the boys in the street ask one another, ‘Who is this admirer of the Candiola?’ The other night, fearing discovery, we stopped our talks at the grating. Mariquilla came down, opened the garden gate, and I entered. No one could discover us, because Don Jeronimo, believing her to be in bed, retired to his room to count his money, and the old servant, the only one in the house, took us under her wing. Alone in the garden we sat down upon some stone steps and watched the brightness of the moonlight through the boughs of a great black poplar. In that majestic silence our souls contemplated the divine, and we experienced a deep sentiment, beyond words to express. Our felicity is so great that at times it is a living torment. If there are moments in which one might desire to be a hundred beings, there are also moments in which one might desire not to exist. We pass long hours there. The night before last we were there until daybreak. My teacher believed me to be with the guards, so I was not obliged to hasten. When morning first began to dawn, we separated. Over the top of the wall of the garden appeared the roofs of the neighboring houses and the top of the Torre Nueva. Pointing it out to me, Mariquilla said, ‘When that tower stands straight, then only shall I cease to love you.’ ”</p>
			<p>Augustine said no more. A cannon-shot sounded from the side of Mount Torrero, and we both turned in that direction.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
